
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2021-10-01/end-chinas-rise

The prevailing consensus, in Washington and overseas, is that China is
surging past the United States. “If we don’t get moving,” President
Joe Biden has said, “they’re going to eat our lunch.” Countries
everywhere are preparing, in the words of an Asian diplomat, for China
to be “number one.”

Plenty of evidence supports this view. China’s GDP has risen 40-fold
since 1978. China boasts the world’s largest financial reserves, trade
surplus, economy measured by purchasing power parity, and navy
measured by number of ships. While the United States reels from a
shambolic exit from Afghanistan, China is moving aggressively to forge
a Sinocentric Asia and replace Washington atop the global hierarchy.

But if Beijing looks to be in a hurry, that’s because its rise is
almost over. China’s multidecade ascent was aided by strong tailwinds
that have now become headwinds. China’s government is concealing a
serious economic slowdown and sliding back into brittle
totalitarianism. The country is suffering severe resource scarcity and
faces the worst peacetime demographic collapse in history. Not least,
China is losing access to the welcoming world that enabled its
advance.

Welcome to the age of “peak China.” Beijing is a strong revisionist
power that wants to remake the world, but its time to do so is already
running out. This realization should not inspire complacency in
Washington—just the opposite. Once-rising powers frequently become
aggressive when their fortunes fade and their enemies multiply. China
is tracing an arc that often ends in tragedy: a dizzying rise followed
by the specter of a hard fall.

MAKING A MIRACLE

China has been rising for so long that many observers think its
ascendance is inevitable. In fact, the past few decades of peace and
prosperity are a historical anomaly, caused by several fleeting
trends.

To start, China enjoyed a mostly safe geopolitical environment and
friendly relations with the United States. For most of its modern
history, China’s vulnerable location at the hinge of Eurasia and the
Pacific had condemned it to conflict and hardship. From the First
Opium War in 1839 until the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1949,
imperialist powers ripped apart the country. After China unified under
communist rule in 1949, it faced extreme U.S. hostility; Beijing
suffered the enmity of both superpowers after the Sino-Soviet alliance
collapsed in the 1960s. Isolated and surrounded, China was racked by
poverty and strife.

The opening to the United States in 1971 broke this pattern. Beijing
suddenly had a superpower ally. Washington warned Moscow not to attack
China and fast-tracked Beijing’s integration with the wider world. By
the mid-1970s, China had a safe homeland and access to foreign markets
and capital—and the timing was perfect. World trade surged sixfold
from 1970 to 2007. China rode the momentum of globalization and became
the workshop of the world.

It could do so because China’s government was largely committed to
reform. After Mao Zedong’s death in 1976, the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) instituted term limits and other checks on its top leaders. It
began to reward technocratic competence and good economic
performance. Rural communities were allowed to set up loosely
regulated enterprises. Special economic zones expanded across the
country and allowed foreign businesses to operate freely. In
preparation for joining the World Trade Organization in 2001, Beijing
adopted modern legal and tax collection systems. China had the right
package of policies to thrive in an open world.

China also had the right kind of population. It experienced the
greatest demographic dividend in modern history. In the first decade
of this century, it boasted ten working-age adults for every senior
citizen. The average is closer to five for most major economies.

That demographic advantage was the fortuitous result of wild policy
fluctuations. In the 1950s and 1960s, the CCP encouraged women to have
many children to boost a population decimated by warfare and
famine. The population surged 80 percent in 30 years. But in the late
1970s, Beijing pumped the brakes, limiting each family to one
child. As a result, in the 1990s and in the early years of this
century, China had a massive workforce with relatively few seniors or
children to care for. No population has ever been better poised for
productivity.

China did not need much outside help to supply its citizens with food
and water and its industries with most raw materials. Easy access to
these resources, plus cheap labor and weak environmental protections,
made it an industrial powerhouse.

REVERSAL OF FORTUNES

But once-in-an-epoch bonanzas don’t last forever. For the past decade,
advantages that once helped the country soar have become liabilities
dragging it down.

For starters, China is running out of resources. Half of its rivers
have disappeared, and pollution has left 60 percent of its
groundwater—by the government’s own admission—“unfit for human
contact.” Breakneck development has made it the world’s largest net
energy importer. Food security is deteriorating: China has destroyed
40 percent of its farmland through overuse and become the world’s
largest importer of agricultural products. Partly owing to resource
scarcity, growth is becoming very expensive: China must invest three
times as much capital to generate growth as it did in the early years
of this century, an increase far greater than one might expect as any
economy matures.

China is also running out of people, thanks to the legacy of the
one-child policy. Between 2020 and 2035, China will lose roughly 70
million working-age adults and gain 130 million senior
citizens. That’s a France-sized population of consumers, taxpayers,
and workers gone—and a Japan-sized population of pensioners added—in
15 years. From 2035 to 2050, China will lose an additional 105 million
workers and gain another 64 million seniors. The economic consequences
will be dire. Current projections suggest that age-related spending
must triple by 2050, from ten percent to 30 percent of GDP. For
perspective, all of China’s government spending currently totals about
30 percent of GDP.

Dealing with these problems will be especially difficult because China
is now ruled by a dictator who consistently sacrifices economic
efficiency for political power. Private firms generate most of the
country’s wealth, yet under President Xi Jinping, private firms are
starved of capital. Instead, inefficient state-owned enterprises
receive 80 percent of government loans and subsidies. China’s boom was
spearheaded by local entrepreneurs, but Xi’s anticorruption campaign
has scared local leaders from engaging in economic
experimentation. His government has essentially outlawed negative
economic news, making smart reforms nearly impossible, while a wave of
politically driven regulations has squelched innovation.

As China has become more assertive and authoritarian, the world has
become less conducive to Chinese growth. Beijing has faced thousands
of new trade barriers since the 2008 financial crisis. Most of the
world’s largest economies are walling off their telecommunications
networks from Chinese influence. Australia, India, Japan, and other
countries are looking to cut China out of their supply chains.

ECONOMIC QUAGMIRE

With the end of its four-decade holiday from history, China now faces
two trends—slowing growth and strategic encirclement—that spell the
end of its rise.

Owing to its accumulating problems, the Chinese economy has entered
the most protracted slowdown of the post-Mao era. China’s official GDP
growth rate dropped from 15 percent in 2007 to six percent in 2019,
before COVID-19 dragged growth down to a little over two percent in
2020. Even those figures are overstated: rigorous studies show that
China’s actual growth rate could be as low as half the
government-listed figure.

Worse still, most of China’s GDP growth since 2008 has resulted from
the government’s force-feeding capital through the economy. Subtract
stimulus spending and China’s economy is hardly growing at
all. Productivity, the key ingredient for wealth creation, declined
ten percent between 2010 and 2019—the worst drop-off in a great power
since the Soviet Union in the 1980s.

For the past decade, advantages that once helped China soar have
become liabilities dragging it down.

The indications of this unproductive growth are ubiquitous. China has
more than 50 ghost cities—urban centers with highways and houses but
not people. Almost two-thirds of China’s infrastructure projects will
never recoup the costs of their construction. The result,
unsurprisingly, is out-of-control debt. China’s total debt jumped
eightfold between 2008 and 2019. We know how this story ends: with
investment-led bubbles that collapse into prolonged slumps. In Japan,
excessive lending resulted in three lost decades of negligible
growth. In the United States, it caused the Great Recession. Given the
size of China’s debt mountain, its downturn could be even worse. The
problems that the massively indebted Chinese property developer
Evergrande is now experiencing may simply be signs of things to come.

The party isn’t admitting defeat: Xi hopes to renew rapid growth
through technological innovation, and R & D spending has tripled since
2006. Yet these efforts have failed to boost productivity, and China
still accounts for small shares of global markets in most high-tech
industries. The main reason is that China’s top-down R & D system,
although excellent at mobilizing resources, stifles the open flow of
information and capital necessary for sustained innovation. The
ongoing political clampdown, by incentivizing intellectual conformity,
will compound the problem.

Beijing has, for example, spent tens of billions of dollars on a
domestic microchip industry yet still relies on imports for 80 percent
of the country’s computing needs. China threw tens of billions of
dollars into biotech, yet its COVID-19 vaccines can’t compete with
those produced in democratic countries. Innovation won’t save China
from slowing growth. And that slump will shake the system as another
threat—strategic encirclement—closes in.

RING OF FIRE

Eurasia has often been a deathtrap for aspiring hegemons: there are
too many nearby enemies that can make common cause with offshore
superpowers. For almost 40 years, a rising China avoided strategic
encirclement by downplaying its global ambitions and maintaining
friendly relations with the United States. But that period is over. As
Beijing has become more aggressive in the South China Sea, the Taiwan
Strait, and elsewhere, it has engendered hostility nearly all around.

Over the past five years, the United States has abandoned engagement
and embraced neo-containment. Washington has carried out its largest
naval and missile expansion in a generation, imposed its most
aggressive tariffs since World War II, and implemented its tightest
restrictions on foreign investment since the Cold War—all directed at
China. Arms sales and military support to frontline states have
increased; U.S. technological sanctions are threatening to destroy
Huawei and other Chinese firms. In 2021, China’s deputy foreign
minister complained that “a whole-of-government and whole-of-society
campaign is being waged to bring China down.”

Xi Jinping will wonder whether he can deliver on his grandiose
pledges. And that’s when the world should get really worried.

The United States’ turn against China has contributed to a broader
backlash against Beijing’s power. In Northeast Asia, Taiwan has become
more determined than ever to maintain its de facto independence, and
the government has approved a bold new defense strategy that could
make the island extremely hard to conquer. Japan has agreed to
cooperate closely with the United States to fend off Chinese
aggression in the region. Through its own belligerence, Beijing has
given the U.S.-Japanese alliance an explicitly anti-China cast.

The countries around the South China Sea are also starting to hedge
against China. Vietnam is acquiring mobile shore-based missiles,
Russian attack submarines, new fighter aircraft, and surface ships
armed with advanced cruise missiles. Singapore has quietly become a
significant U.S. military partner. Indonesia increased its defense
spending 20 percent in 2020 and another 21 percent in 2021. Even the
Philippines, which courted China for most of President Rodrigo
Duterte’s term, is now reiterating its claims in the South China Sea
and ramping up air and naval patrols.

China’s ambitions are provoking a response beyond East Asia, too, from
Australia to India to Europe. Everywhere Beijing is pushing, a growing
cast of rivals is pushing back. The Quadrilateral Security Dialogue—a
strategic partnership that includes Australia, India, Japan, and the
United States—has emerged as a focal point of anti-China cooperation
among the most powerful democracies in the Indo-Pacific. The new AUKUS
(Australia–United Kingdom–United States) alliance unites the core of
the Anglosphere against Beijing. The United States is forging
overlapping mini-coalitions to ensure that advanced democracies stay
ahead in key technologies, while the G-7 and NATO are staking out
tougher positions on Taiwan and other issues. To be sure,
counter-China cooperation remains a work in progress, because many
countries still rely on trade with Beijing. But these interlocking
partnerships could eventually form a noose around Beijing’s neck.

FLAMING OUT

China is a risen power, not a rising one: it has acquired formidable
geopolitical capabilities, but its best days are behind it. That
distinction matters, because China has staked out vaulting ambitions
and now may not be able to achieve them without drastic action. The
CCP aims to reclaim Taiwan, dominate the western Pacific, and spread
its influence around the globe. Xi has declared that China seeks a
“future where we will win the initiative and have the dominant
position.” Yet that dream is starting to slip away, as growth slows
and China faces an increasingly hostile world.

That may seem like good news for Washington: the chances of China
effortlessly sprinting past the United States are low. But it’s not
entirely reassuring. As China’s problems take hold, the future will
look menacing for Beijing. The specter of stagnation will haunt CCP
officials. Xi Jinping will wonder whether he can deliver on his
grandiose pledges. And that’s when the world should get really
worried.

China’s leaders are determined to move fast because they are running
out of time.

Revisionist powers tend to become most dangerous when the gap between
their ambitions and their capabilities starts to look
unmanageable. When a dissatisfied power’s strategic window begins to
close, even a low-probability lunge for victory may seem better than a
humiliating descent. When authoritarian leaders worry that
geopolitical decline will destroy their political legitimacy,
desperation often follows. For example, Germany waged World War I to
prevent its hegemonic aspirations from being crushed by a
British-Russian-French entente; Japan started World War II in Asia to
prevent the United States from choking off its empire.

China today checks many worrying boxes. Slowing growth?
Check. Strategically encircled? Check. Brutal authoritarian regime
with few sources of organic legitimacy? Check. Historical axe to grind
and revanchist ambitions? Check and check. In fact, China is already
engaging in the practices—the relentless military buildup, the search
for spheres of influence in Asia and beyond, the effort to control
critical technologies and resources—to be expected from a country in
its position. If there is a formula for aggression by a peaking power,
China exhibits the key elements.

Many observers believe China is throwing its weight around today
because it is so confident in its continued ascent. Xi certainly
appears to think that COVID-19 and political instability in the United
States have created new possibilities to advance. But the more
likely—and much scarier—possibility is that China’s leaders are
determined to move fast because they are running out of time. What
happens when a country that wants to reorder the world concludes it
might not be able to do so peacefully? Both history and China’s
current behavior suggest the answer is: Nothing good.

